Now we're going to add a few things to our very interesting conversation.
John, you mentioned the parish of Cumdeidh rather than Ryder at all.
Can you tell me what your connection with Cumdeidh is?
Well, I've lived in Cumdeidh all my life and when I was on Ryder and Cumdeidh council
they used to make fun of me and said my world finished at Cumdeidh bridge.
But Cumdeidh is a very, very big parish with a lot more sheep than people living in it
and it's supposed to be the biggest parish in Great Britain.
And, I forgot where I left it.
It's much bigger than Ryder then, is it?
Yes, but Cumdeidh goes all the way up to the bridge by Clirwyn Farm
and then on the mountain road it goes to Abergoongie, which is in Cardiganshire,
and Batalough, which is in Montgomeryshire.
So the three sort of counties meet there.
So from the top of the Batalough across to Clirwyn is all Cumdeidh.
So you can see why it's so big.
It is huge, in fact.
Can I ask John, if you went to church, would you have gone to Cumdeidh church
or the Nantworth church in Ellyn Valley?
I didn't go to either.
I went to Bethania Baptist Chapel and I probably went there 52 Sundays a year.
Sunday school at two o'clock, a service at two thirty,
and on the third Sunday a service was at six o'clock in the evening.
And where we had big thanksgivings in October, Harvest Thanksgiving,
and my mother and father would bring people home for tea and supper, you know,
and very often the current preacher would come.
And my parents were both very religious, so there was no getting out of it,
but as I became a teenager I went less and less.
You know what happens.
Yes, that often happens, doesn't it?
Fine.
If we could just perhaps say a little bit more about the shearing
and the festivities that you had there.
I expect shearing went on into the night, did they?
Well, shearing when I was a youngster, say before I was fourteen,
was all done by hand shears where a man would catch them,
put the sheep over the cove, another one would carry them in,
and drop it on the bench in front of you,
and then you would shear the belly of the sheep,
and then tie its four legs in a woolen cord and shear it, you know, until you'd finished.
Then there was another man called the carrier out.
He carried the sheep outside with his arm through the four legs
and put it on the floor on a bed of newly cut racken.
And there'd be a bar down the middle of the racken where ewes went one side of it,
and tups and weathers, which were male castrated sheep, put the other side, the pole,
and then the man with the pitch spot would come along and pitch them,
and he would mouth all the weathers, and if they had a full mouth,
which means they've got all their teeth up, they had the sail weather pitch mark put on them.
Then the children's job was to loose these sheep go
and hand the strings over to a man who had a pen and book,
and he would write down, and then you would have a perfect count at the end of the day
of the sex and age of all the sheep.
I see.
Today is Friday the 23rd of September, 2022.
My name's Jewel Willie, and I'm talking with Mr John Jones at Harvard Hardware here in Reda.
John, first of all, could we just get your date of birth, thank you.
The 2nd of February, 1948.
Thank you.
And where were you born and where did you go?
I was born in the city of Reda.
Thank you.
And where were you born and where did you grow up, John?
I was born at Upper Lengvadug, Elm Valley, and I was brought up there,
and I was there until, well, I was 20 something.
And can you tell me a little bit about the building itself,
how old it was and what sort of facilities you had, water, etc.?
It belonged to the Lewis Lloyd Estate, and half of it was very old,
the left-hand side, as you're looking at it from the road,
but there was an extension built later, and there's a great big window on the right-hand side,
and that was a shop when the dams were being built, a grocery shop.
Right, and your memories of growing up, your facilities, access to water, etc.?
Yeah, well, I had a happy, loving home.
There was my mother, father, my grandmother, and my middle sister still living at home,
so I had this sort of love.
I didn't have many toys, but it was a very loving relationship with my family.
And I expect there were plenty of things to do, lots of jobs to do on the farm, John.
Oh yes, there was any amount of jobs.
I always liked poultry, so I used to feed the hens with my mother,
and when I attended Ellen Village School, I always milked a cow before going in the morning.
She was my favourite cow, and very quiet, and then when I finished her,
I'd come in and have her wash and go to school.
So you had your routine.
Yeah.
Lovely, and were your family mainly sheep farmers, John?
Yes, mainly sheep. We kept about ten cows,
and we sold the calves off when they were about a fortnight old,
as we kept them for milk, which we delivered to the Ellen Valley Hotel in Ellen Village.
I see. Now, some of the main events that took place in the valley, for instance, the shearing,
can you tell us a little bit about how involved you were in that?
Well, the shearing was the highlight of the year, as far as I was concerned.
You know, all the neighbouring farmers came to help you,
and we had always roast dinner, and all the women were very busy,
and at lunchtime we would have a game of football, then go back to shearing in the afternoon.
And it was busy, but it was a highlight, and it was always the last Thursday in June at Llanfattig.
So you would, in this way, get to know all the farmers in the valley, would you, John,
and shared a very good social life?
Yeah, I knew all the farmers, and they all went by their names of where they were farming,
not by their surname. You would have Richard the Henfran or Richard Reece Llanfattig, you know.
And that is how they did it in them days, out damp and coy.
I see. Right. Now, we associate the Ellen Valley with water, of course.
What sort of water supply did you have to your house?
We had water out of the brook until I was through, well, I can't remember exactly,
but after a few years the Louis Lloyd estate piped it in from a well,
which was 300 or 400 yards up the field, and it was a harder water,
but it never went dry until the hot summer of 1976, and it did go dry then.
So I had to go to Kingsfield House in the van and have two churns of water, and that was nothing.
Right, and your family, John, were they from the Upper Llanfaddog Farm as well?
Yeah, my father was born there, and his grandfather and his great-grandmother, they were there.
My family, on my father's side, the one side of it, came over from Cardiganshire in 1817,
and my mother's side, she was born at the Gunfran Blanier, and she was christened in Langley Hangel,
a hellegan, and she moved to the clean Ellen Valley when she was four-year-old.
So... There were Joneses on both sides.
Right, and where did you play? You must have found lots of places to play as a young lad in your farming...
Yeah, well, there was plenty of places to play on a farm. You could hide behind the trees,
but a lot of our time was spent down the brook, joining the river where we was catching minnows and that
until I was old enough to fish with a rod and line.
Excuse me. Is it still up?
I think it's still going.
It's only about down.
That's all right. If you want a break, you can have one.
I'm all right.
Fine. Right, so, did you get around a lot by horseback, John, or did you use a bike?
Well, both, but mainly horseback. But we used a bike. My sister Joan delivered milk round the Ellen Village,
and it was a churn of milk carried on the handlebars of the bike with a pint measure.
So when you got into a house, you measured a pint out and poured it in the jug.
It's completely different now, but later on we had bottles and delivered them when we had a van.
I don't think we had a van until I was about 13.
Fine. What about sporting events, John? Did you take part in sporting events at the Ellen Valley?
Yes. We had a sports in the Ellen Valley every year up to 1916.
We had a sports in the Ellen Valley every year up to 1964, I think it was.
And it's on the fields, which I own now.
And I always run there every year and rode a bike in the bicycle race.
And I don't think I ever raced a horse there, although there was race horses,
because our two horses were more flodders than race horses.
Fine. How often did you actually go to market then, being farmers?
The market would be in Ryder, I suppose?
Yes. Well, my father occasionally sold a cow or cow and calf in Ryder during the year,
but the main market sales was now in the autumn, the sale use.
And we always used to drive them down to Ryder with the dogs, and we never lost the sheep.
And then we got them to the market. We tied the dogs to the rails, and they were there all day with us.
Except one year the trade was bad and we decided to take the sheep home.
A car pulled up and said, you can manage the sheep, John, I'll give your father a lift home.
He left his dog with me, and as soon as he got in the car, the dog ran back to Ryder,
and unfortunately he got killed.
And my sister Joan went to look for him and she came back with a dead dog.
And even worse, the next day the sheep were no better, and we sold them then.
So it was a waste of time bringing them home.
An unfortunate incident, but they stick in your mind, don't they, John?
Yes.
Okay, let's talk a little bit about school now. Can you tell me where you went to school when you started?
Well, I went to school in the Ellen Village School, which was run by Birmingham then.
Although I lived on the Radnorshire side, the river, I went to the school which is in Brackenshire.
I used to walk there every day, and once a year I had to pay a penny to cross the footbridge to go in the Ellen Village,
because the footbridge was privately built, I think, by the Thomases, Lawland, Vadug when they owned the Ellen Valley Hotel.
And it was there for people from Ellen Village to walk down to the Valley Hotel.
So it was a private bridge, and I paid a penny once a year to cross it.
And how long were you at that school, John?
Well, I started there in Eastern 1953, and I was there until the summer of 1959.
And I really enjoyed myself there. We had a lot of fun.
And coming home from school, there was a brook in the middle of the Ellen Village, and we had empty polished tins.
And us boys used to put these tins in at the top, and a race would get to the bottom first, you know.
And then my parents would be saying, why are you so late coming home? But I never told them what we were doing.
Certainly lots of things to entertain yourself with.
Now, am I right in thinking that where you went is now the current Ellen Valley Lodge?
Yes, that is correct.
But the school prior to that was somewhere else, John. Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Well, there was a school immediately above the lodge. There's a flat in the ground there between there and Stone House.
That was built for the Navvy children when the old village was there.
And before that, there was a school halfway up the cabin, not far from the old Lankwill Church,
where my grandmother, Alice Ann Ably, taught English, no Welsh. And they come there about 1891.
And the purpose of speaking and teaching English was to accommodate all the Navvy children coming into the area, was that correct?
That is correct. You know, up to then, it had been all Welsh.
Tell me a little bit about the 11+, John. I understand you were one of the few children that went to that school from the Radnorshire area.
How did that affect you?
Well, there was only two of us of my age who was leaving that year.
The other boy didn't try the 11+, so he went straight to Brintyrian Secondary.
I tried the 11+, and luckily enough, I don't know what it is, I managed to scrape in.
But then I had a place in Landerindard Grammar School.
And I found it hard. I'd gone from 15 pupils to about 500. It was a big change in my life.
And I didn't know anybody, only my one nephew, because I didn't mix with Radar children.
They had their own school, and life was hard on the bus.
And some of the older pupils give us a hard time. Every time they walk by us first-formers, they hit us across the head with their daps.
Unpleasant memories, but there we are.
So am I right in thinking then that the business about the 11+, was simply because Radnorshire and Brackenshire had their own rules
regarding the 11+, and when or if you took it?
Yes, that was right. The children on the Brackenshire side, the river, all went to Belf High School.
They didn't have to try it. And they were graded there when they got there.
But us Radnorshires side had to try it, but there wasn't many from the Radnorshires side.
And am I right in thinking again that it's the Ellyn River itself that formed the county boundary?
Yes, it was. And I mean, I only lived about 200 yards from the river, but I was classed at Radnorshire.
And I spent most of my time in Brackenshire, but that didn't count.
Yes. Now you spoke about your relatives who came to teach at the former school.
Let's talk a little bit about Welsh, Welsh in your own background.
How much of many of your family do you remember using Welsh as a day-to-day language?
Well, I didn't hear my mother ever talk in Welsh, but my father wasn't brilliant at it, but he could speak Welsh.
But then his father and his grandparents were fluent Welsh.
And I suppose like mother speak in English and my father speak in Welsh, it was predominantly English.
But I picked up a lot of Welsh. And when I went to Llandrind at grandma's school, I had a choice between French and Welsh.
So I chose Welsh.
Right, you wanted to keep it going. Right.
And I suppose your former ancestors would have been all Welsh speaking from the farms in the Llandrind?
Oh, they were. My mother's family, a lot of them come over from Abergwesh. They couldn't speak any English.
And my father's side were all Welsh, you know. My great-grandmother was from a Sputty Estrid.
And I don't think they could hardly speak English until Alice Ann Ably married my grandfather.
And then the English came into our family.
I see. What about the changes that you yourself have seen in the Valley, John, through your lifetime?
Could you enlarge on that?
Well, there's been many changes and not all for the better.
Like Birmingham, you can say what you like about them. They were very good landlords.
They were very good to the farmers and they supplied them with poles and gates and hurdles to keep the farms up.
And they kept the rents very low.
But when it went to Welsh Water, everything changed. You weren't given anything and the rents spiralled.
And that is one of the things.
Ellen Valley has changed completely.
I mean, in the old days you could fish from the Cabin Dam to Garry Dee up the old railway line.
And there wasn't a bush growing.
Now it's like a jungle because they fenced it off and there's no stock nibbling at the new plants which come up.
And I don't know, it's so much busier now since the centre opened.
It's just one line of cars going up all the time.
And I'm not the only one that thinks it, but the Valley was much better in the old days.
Yes, memories for you John.
Now the Ellen Valley area is part of the bigger parish of Cwmdyda.
Can you tell us a little bit about Cwmdyda and its extremities?
Well, Cwmdyda is a very big parish.
It starts on the Y there, the boundary between Raider and Cwmdyda.
And all the Ellen Valley, all the way up to Clirwyn Farm is Cwmdyda.
And it comes back across the top to where we joined Cardiganshire.
And although Abergungie is in Cardiganshire, the Talug was in Montgomeryshire, the rest is all...
And it goes up the Durnall Valley quite a long way.
So that is why it's the biggest parish in Great Britain.
And probably not a lot of people are aware of that then.
No.
But it's in fact the biggest.
Were you a churchgoer or a chapelgoer John?
Oh, I was a chapelgoer, Bethania Baptist Chapel.
And my father was a deacon and a trustee.
And we had to go 52 Sundays a year.
Sunday school at 2 o'clock, service at 2.30.
And on the third Sunday, 6 p.m.
On a Sunday night.
And I went there till I was a late teenager and then quietly drifted away.
But my parents were both very religious.
I see.
And Bethania Chapel, John.
Has there always been a chapel in that area or was that...?
No.
The old Bethania Chapel was immediately under Garrick D. Bridge.
And that was one of the first jobs they did.
Build a new chapel on part of Upper Llanfadu ground on the field there.
As they could bring the bodies down and transfer them.
And if you ever go in the graveyard in Bethania,
a lot of the headstones are sloping and falling.
And my father said it was because the coffins, the decayed ones,
were put in big oak boxes, much bigger than the coffins.
And when they've rotted, the ground just fell in.
And I think Bethania held its first service in 1895.
Which was almost ten years before the dams were opened.
I see. Most interesting.
I've got a record at home of the first money paid in in 1895.
The collection.
Very interesting.
So many memories.
Can we go now from the chapel to pony trekking, John?
I understand you were very involved with that in your younger days.
Yes, I was.
I was one of the committee members of the Raider Pony Trekking Association.
And I did a lot of work for it.
And I always had two or three horses in the association.
You know, we rented them out and we got paid at the end of the week so much a horse.
And that is where I met my first wife, Gina Day.
She was a trekker and eventually we married.
And when I left Llanfaduk, I became chief guide for two years.
And so it was much different then because we'd become nearly all day trekkers.
Before that, the girls would come for a week and they could ride.
And then you had day trekkers.
Most of them were novices.
Some had to be led.
And the only ones I found who were good riders were people who arrived on a motorbike.
I see. They probably had using similar muscles, I suppose.
Indeed.
And where was the actual centre?
Where was the pony trekking based in those days?
John, did it have a base?
Yes.
Down Water Lane, at the bottom, there's a building there now belonging to Michael Lloyd.
And that and a yard.
And the horses were grazed on the wagglo, amongst other places.
There were fields around town they were taken to when we had too many.
But that was the real base.
And it was a very handy place because that's where the blacksmith came to shoe the horses.
In the yard there.
Well, inside the building.
And, you know, I've got many happy memories of Water Lane.
And you could ride the horses across the ford and come out by the triangle.
So really it was based over the other side of the river then, in Red?
Yes.
The wagglo of Water Lane.
That was amazing.
Well, we had some down here where Simon Price's yard is now.
We had ground there.
That's in South Street, isn't it?
Where the old tannery was.
Yes.
And after that there was some down here by the old mill house that belonged to Percy Curtis.
But the main place was down Water Lane.
And you rode the horses up Water Lane and most days you turned left for the valley.
But sometimes they went right and they were going to the Sun Inn and, you know,
that would be coming away.
And is the industry as big today or has it changed a lot?
Oh, it's changed a lot now.
I mean, people can go abroad for a lot less money than you spend on a week's trekking.
It's completely different.
And the only trekking which is going now is the Lion Royal.
And I mean, they're not busy like we were.
They might be ten or a dozen now.
But I mean, I've seen a hundred horses out with the association in a day,
which is a lot of horses.
Sad, the demise of such an industry like that, because it really was an industry.
It was.
I mean, Coontide-Rams and Cornhill and them, they were full every week in the summer from May till September.
And well, they're not pubs anymore now, are they?
And everything's changed.
Everything has changed.
And the two former pubs you've mentioned, they're the ones, am I right, in West Street?
Yes.
As you go towards the...
And the funny part about it, not many valley people drunk in the Triangle,
only the ones who live close to it.
The valley farmers always drank in Coontide-Rams.
And that was their center.
And I mean, I was in there when I was 14, 15 long before I should have.
But you could...
Mother used to come down on the bus on a Wednesday and do some shopping.
And if a bag was getting heavy, the one bag, she would just leave it inside the door at Coontide-Rams.
And the powwls would let you pick it up later.
And you know, it was home from home.
Would you say there's any pubs like that in the area now, John, where...
Oh, no, no.
The powwls have been here for generations, you know, and they knew every farmer.
And now the pubs, every three or five years, change hands.
And they're not run by locals anymore.
A lot of changes.
John, can we just briefly get on to this fascinating family tree that you and your son Tom have been working on?
I understand you've gone back many, many generations, tracing your ancestry back to the Lewis Lloyds.
Yeah.
Well, even before that, the powwls, when they married into the Lewis Lloyds, they were at Lanarkow.
And Lanarkow was the first place where the Baptist chapel started.
Before, they went down to Gary Dee and then came down to Bethania.
The one at Gary Dee was called Bethany Ellen Vale.
And yes, we've gone back.
Tom has gone back about 700 years in our family.
I know we've been helped by being related to the Lewis Lloyds because they had a lot of records of their own which are up in Abba, you know.
But I'm proud, you know, we can go back so far that our family have been associated with Ellen Vale.
A wonderful connection. Wonderful, wonderful heritage.
You mentioned Lanarkow. Is that in the Clarewyn Valley?
That's in the Clarewyn Valley, just over the bridge.
It's now the Longhouse. It was a Longhouse then.
And the Stevens were farming there 100 years ago.
And I think the Stevens is quite progressive farmers.
And they went all the way down to Dolly Hill for a load of line to improve the ground.
And they brought with horses and carts.
And they brought it back all the way to Lanarkow.
And before the bridge was there, crossing the river, they tipped the line in the river at Axaner.
And I think it killed all the fish from there to the junction pole.
But this is before the dams was there.
That's a true story.
A project that went a little bit wrong after.
It was going down to Dolly Hill.
Well, that's virtually on the English border, isn't it?
It would have been quite a long journey.
It was, yeah. I know it's down there, not far from Glade Street.
That's right.
Well, John, it's been wonderful talking to you.
It's wonderful to talk to somebody who's got such a proud heritage of the Ellyn Valley
and such wonderful memories and ancestry of the Ellyn Valley.
Now, you've got two grandchildren.
And they love going to the valley, I understand, do they?
Yes, they do.
They love, I've still got some ground belonging to Upper Llanfairdeg, and they love going there.
And they can run free in the rivers there.
Well, you know, with young children, the river's a big attraction, isn't it?
And Tom takes Arthur up there to camp for the night now and then.
Wonderful.
And they also go up to the centre and play on them things
and walk up the back road from the suspension bridge up to the Canoogh Rock, you know,
on the left-hand side of the river,
and then come back down over the little bridge below the dam.
Oh, they love it.
I'm sure.
So, long may they enjoy their heritage and their surroundings
and preserve the memories that you obviously have so carefully.
Well, thank you very much again, John.
It's been wonderful talking to you. Thank you.